Not on your nelly!
Is this the start of the second wave?
Only time will tell.
The main lab,
it’s at capacity, currently.
We have patients who have been
waiting out the Covid crisis
to be able to feel safe
coming back to the hospital.
The great thing about the NHS
is we always tend to find a way.
Whatever it takes.
Are you ready? Yes. Yeah. Ready.
Action!
Hello!
# I’m on the big stage
# I got my crew... #
Welcome back to our kitchen.
# I’ll get you moving... #
I like it.
# It’s what I do... #
Really smooth.
# Let me show you
what it’s all about... #
Shall we liven this gaff up
a little bit?
# I’m gonna light it up
# Yeah, I’m gonna light it up
# Let me show you
what it’s all about... #
Here we go.
Welcome to BBC One, everybody.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, Nicky Morgan,
former Education Secretary
in David Cameron’s government
and Culture Secretary for six months
under Borisjohnson,
first as an MP and then
from the House of Lords
as a Conservative peer.
Labour’s shadow Chief Secretary
to the Treasury and MP for ten years
and a Labour Party member
since the age of 15,
Bridget Phillipson.
Joining us down the line
from New York, world renowned
economist, professor,
former chief economist
of the World Bank and Nobel
prizewinner, Joseph Stiglitz,
Anne Longfield, children’s
Commissioner for England
with particular responsibility
for vulnerable children and those
who are looked after by the state or
who are in care and founder of OVO
Energy 11 years ago and now the UK’s
second largest energy supplier,
Good evening.
Welcome to my guest here
in the studio and to
ProfessorJoseph Stiglitz who joins
us down the line from New York.
Our live audience is with us
again via video link,
this evening from Sedgefield,
which of course is every bit
as exciting as New York,
very good to have you with us
and for all of you watching at home,
do join in the conversation.
You know how to do it by now,
on social media, @bbcquestiontime,
it is good to have your company,
let us know what you think.
Right, let’s take our first question
tonight, which is from Steven Way.
Thank you, Fiona.
Good evening everyone.
Why did Rishi Sunak wait so long
to come up with today’s new plan
when so much of the uk has been
struggling for weeks?
So, why did you wait so long, Nicky?
Well, actually, what has happened,
this is the third time in a month
that Rishi has responded
to the developing situation and that
obviously comes on the back of over
£200 billion of economic support
that the Chancellor
and the government have
given to businesses,
to those who are self—employed
and to individuals, in this
completely unprecedented year.
But why has he waited until now,
given the huge row there was over
Greater Manchester just on Tuesday?
This must have been in the pipeline?
Why not announce it then?
Well, because I think obviously
it takes time to work
through the ramifications
of the package and don’t forget,
of course, the furlough scheme,
originally set up in Spring,
only expires at the end
of this month, so actually
it is about looking
at what is the situation,
what is the support that is needed
and listening to what people
are saying and, of course,
Greater Manchester, as the other
areas who have gone into Tier 3 have
had that additional support as well.
Money that local authorities
will also be able to
hand out to businesses.
I think this has been unprecedented
and just look at the impact
on our public finances.
The right thing to do,
but at some point that Bill
is obviously going to have
to be paid.
Bridget.
It is incredible that it has taken
so long and we, you know,
I just do not accept that things
have changed so much
that it is required,
that level of adjustment.
They promised us a winter economy
plan, not very long ago
at all and we are not even
into the winter, the situation has
not changed so much that he needs
to revise that and itjust does not
represent a long—term plan for how
we get through this.
We have seen lots ofjobs lost,
while this in action has been there.
You know, businesses are going bust,
people losing theirjobs,
it is a matter of days
until what we have got in place
expires and all of that worry
and anxiety that is being caused,
he has had to undo problems
of his own making and that is not
good enough, when you are dealing
with the situation
that is unprecedented.
But people’s livelihoods
are on the line here and, you know,
the health response and economic
response is going to have to be
betterjoined together,
because we are in this position,
where the test trace and isolate
isn’t working as it should,
the government spent a considerable
amount of money on it,
but actually the figure out today
show that fewer contacts than ever
are being tracked down.
People are waiting too long
to get test results back
and until the government gets a grip
on the health crisis,
the economyjust will not recover.
Stephen, do you think Rishi Sunak
has waited too long and do you think
what he is offering is enough?
So, I can remember starting OVO
Energy in 2009 and I remember,
in the early days, I knew the names
of all my employees,
I knew them personally,
moving quickly was really easy.
We could make decisions,
we could react to competitors,
we could react to customers really
quickly and something I have learned
over the last ten years
is that the bigger the organisation
that you are running,
the longer it takes to make change
and what we have seen in the last
couple of weeks, we have seen
a very dynamic landscape,
the rate of infection has been
unpredictable, it has been rising,
in many parts of the country,
and I have a lot of sympathy
for civil servants and politicians
who are having to react in real—time
to this and if you think
about something as complicated
as this employment scheme,
and the furlough scheme
and everything, I look at this
and I say, I have been very
impressed at how the machinery
of government and I’m notjust
saying the government,
but the machinery, has been able
to move so quickly,
because the thing that we really
have to avoid is the kind
of confusion that has come
from badly executed communication
or inconsistent policy execution
and I think if it takes
a little bit longer,
of course everyone wants it done
yesterday, but if it takes
a little bit longer,
it takes a little bit longer,
and the problem is that we are going
to face, they are going to last
for years and years and years.
So, it feels very urgent
at the moment, but getting it right
and making sure it is clearly
communicated, I think it’s
going to be the most important thing
in making this successful.
Joseph Stiglitz, do you think the UK
is getting it right when it comes
to how the UK is handling
the economy and
supporting businesses?
Well, first let me say
that the delay in the UK has
been unconscionable,
the deficiencies in the programme
were known for a while,
the course of the disease is not
perfectly predictable,
but it was very clear
that it was not under control,
so there was very clear
that there was a need
for additional assistance.
One does not get it perfect,
at any moment of time,
so I agree with what has just been
said, this is a complicated issue,
but the delay causes irreversible
damage and enormous anxiety.
The one thing I can say about the UK
is that it is a model
of good behaviour compared
to the United States.
In what way in particular?
If that is the basis of your
comparison, you’ve done well.
And in what way in
particular do you mean?
Well, the United States
programmes ended inJune,
July and the Trump administration
has been unable to even come up
with an adequate programme,
the particular scheme that we had,
was not as well—designed
as your initial furlough scheme,
which was not the optimal design.
One of the reasons that unemployment
in the United States has
skyrocketed, is that we had
a deficient scheme in keeping
workers affiliated with their firms.
Our unemployment insurance scheme
was incapable of responding
to the millions of people joining
the unemployment role
and in the United States it is even
much more important than in the UK,
because most Americans depend
on employers for their health
insurance and the last thing
you want in the middle of a pandemic
is to have no health insurance!
So, you should appreciate
the National Health Service,
even if you lose yourjob,
you still have the health insurance,
in the United States these
people losing theirjobs,
many of them do not
have health insurance.
So, it was all the more
imperative to keep workers
linked with their firms
and we failed miserably.
I can go into all the reasons why it
failed, but it was a badly designed
programme, badly administered,
having the banks administer
a small business programme,
you knew, it was predictable
what they would do.
They gave the money to those that
were better connected,
which was not the most vulnerable
firms or them smallest firms
or the firms most in need,
they gave it to those
who had better connections.
So, you know, as you look
around the world, I guess
I would say the UK has not done
as well as countries
like New Zealand and many
other countries, but,
on the other hand, you have done
a lot better than the United States.
Anne.
Well, it does feel very
kind of last minute,
I think this evening there will be
people who will be much more
confident about where they stand
than yesterday, but that also means
that there are people and families
especially that had been
through an awful lot over recent
weeks, not knowing what will come.
Everyone who has been
on the furlough scheme has known it
has come to an end at a certain
point and I think that has been
a huge stress for people and also
a lot of people have gone
on to the Universal Credit already,
we know 450,000 families have
and many also thought
that was where they
were ending up, too.
So, I think, clearly there has been
a lot happening at pace,
but this is the long term,
we need to start now seeing
what recovery plan do
we need to have in place,
how can we support families to make
the best decisions for themselves?
Obviously, I would say as well,
the growing number of children
who are being put into poverty,
how do we get them out of poverty
and make sure no more extra come in?
Well, quite a few hands have gone up
as we have been talking, Sarah.
It really doesn’t help
with this sense of the North—
south divide and real resentment,
I think, in the north,
that this has just magically
happened in the wake that London has
gone into Tier 2.
David Owens.
I can’t be the only person sitting
here wondering where on earth
all this money has come from and how
inert it is going to be paid back.
Yes.
Eileen.
Compared to Spain, friends of mine
in Spain, and their businesses,
they have just gone totally bust,
very lucrative business,
they got 20%, So in comparison,
we have done very well.
Martin.
Yeah, I just wonder if there
is a lack of insight in government
into actually what is happening.
For example, I am a schoolteacher
and I am obviously back
at school, working full—time,
which is where I want to be,
but for example, the source
of exceptional funding costs
for helping schools with Covid ended
inJuly at now we have nothing,
we have no additionalfunds to pay
for cleaning or PPE.
Do governments actually
have an insight into what is
actually happening at a sort
of local level?
Allen.
I think they announced the changes
to the system nine days before
the furlough system ends and that
has caused excess anxiety
amongst everyone, really,
because no one could plan anything.
All money is greatly appreciated,
don’t get me wrong, it’s just
to actually announce that nine days
before the furlough system ends does
not give people time
to adjust to make changes
to their own finances.
I mean, what you’re hearing,
Eileen makes the point
that we are doing better than Spain,
for example, and Joseph says
we are not as good as some
countries, but considerably worse
than others, but you have got Sarah
talking about the north—south divide
and Alan talking about very little
time to prepare and it comes back
to Stephen’s question, could this
not have been done sooner?
Well, I go back to the changes and
schemes which had been put in place.
There was obviously
the announcement in September
about the winter economy plan,
there were announcements inJuly
about support forjobs
and encouraging employers to keep
employees on and getting
an extra bonus inJanuary
if that is what they have done.
As I say, as Stephen said,
this is a fast—moving situation
and actually it only becomes clear
and even then it is not
completely clear...
What do you say to someone
like Sarah who says she finds it
interesting that it is happening
just as London is about two
or London is now in Tier 2
whereas in Sedgefield,
for example, they have had
restrictions since mid—September!
And yet the Chancellor has just
spoken about it today.
There have been restrictions
in Leicester and other
places as well and I...
Look, I understand, I completely
understand the frustrations
and to answer the question
of the gentleman who said,
do ministers and government
no, the answer is yes,
because all ministers are all pretty
much constituency MPs
and so they absolutely will be
looking at their inboxes,
looking at their social media feeds,
going to constituencies,
hearing what is happening
in people’s lives, but government
of course has to have a balance
between all the different elements
of the responses and listening
and trying to get that balance right
is obviously a huge task
and it continues to be so,
because the situation continues
to develop all of the time
and we see, for example,
which businesses, obviously have
to remain closed and which are able
to open gradually and there is even
a distinction between hospitality
and which can open and which can’t.
I just really think that the whole
way this looks is one
that is last—minute and it makes
people feel like they are living
in a pinball machine, you know,
one week it is this way and one week
it is that.
I don’t think it is deliberate
at all, Ijust think it is that
difference between the fast pace
of change for people’s lives
at the moment and then the machinery
of government and the speed it takes
or lack of speed it
takes to make decisions.
I think, really, what people
need here is mature,
calm discussion, information,
ability to be able to plan
themselves and also that feeling
of trust and what I am hearing here,
actually, is whether it is
the north—south divide
or whether it is looking at reasons
for late announcements,
there is a need to build that trust
and I think that transparency
is the way that is
going to be achieved.
I am going to move onto another
question, but before I do, Ijust
want to say that we are looking
for people to join our virtual
audience next week.
We are going to be in Lincoln
and the week after that we will be
in Lewisham, in south—east London,
so if you live there or around that
area, do get in touch,
go to the Question Time website
and fill in the form there
and we will get in touch with you.
We would love to hear from you,
the audience is what makes this
programme, so do get in touch
with us at the Question
Time website.
Let’s take another question, talking
about our audience, from Susan Lowe.
Hello.
Andy Burnham’s stand
in Greater Manchester —
is this a master class in how public
servants should exercise
representative democracy?
And what do you think,
Susan?
Well, I think he was clearly
listening to his population
in Greater Manchester,
which I am not sure is something
that I feel the government is doing,
because I for one write to my MP
on a regular basis and I am
constantly told various responses
that the government is wanting
to put forward.
What I don’t get is that human
feeling of what the person
representing my constituency thinks.
And also, when I think that
the government is using the whip
all the time for votes
in Parliament, it is not achieving
what we should be achieving,
in representing people
of this country.
Stephen, what did you make
of Andy Burnham’s stand
in Greater Manchester,
standing up for his people or,
as others have seen it,
dividing the country?
So, I think, the situation
in Manchester was again changing
very quickly and I think
Andy Burnham was absolutely right
to try to drive for the best
possible deal for the people
of Manchester, and represent
local population.
I think that we look at the country
the size of the UK, it is made up,
it is a very diverse nation
and I think there are lots of parts
of our society that I feel are not
being represented or been listened
to and when I think back
to the discussion we might have
about the presidential debate
in the US and we look at politics
in the US and look even in the UK
and see the Brexit debate
that we had and how absolutely
tribal it became, it is really
clear that we have fallen
into a situation where
we are simply not good at listening
to people that we do not agree
with and come from a different tribe
and as someone who grew up
in Northern Ireland in the 19805
and 19905, I have seen
what happens when this really
deteriorates to the worst,
it brings out the worst
in people and I think
whether it is a north—south divide
or richer versus poorer,
we have communities like the arts
feeling unrepresented,
people who work in hospitality
feeling underrepresented and I look
at where we have come from,
from March, when I remember really
feeling a strong sense of national
unity and solidarity
and that we were all in it together
and I look at how far we have come
from that in just six months
and I think, it is really quite
an important moment and I think
if we cannot figure out a way
to come together, and be more
united, then it makes me very
nervous for the future
of the country.
I think, it is not impossible
that we start to get some good news
and people start to feel more
connected, but I think more
than anything, we need to see this
in our political leadership
and when I think about the way
in which politics has become
so toxic and only looking
at the debate yesterday
in the Houses of Parliament,
if we cannot get some grown—up,
collegiate partnership
from our political leaders,
it is no wonder that the country
feels like it is being torn apart.
And so I for one would love
to see Borisjohnson,
Andy Burnham, Nicola Sturgeon,
all of them working together in our
interests and I say, coming again,
I am from Northern Ireland,
if Ian Paisley and Martin McGuinness
could figure out a way
to put their differences aside
and work together, then
surely our leaders today can.
And of course that is
what the Prime Minister has wanted
Keir Starmer to do repeatedly,
is to work with him
and work together.
And throughout this,
we have sought to be constructive,
but of course we have to give voice,
when we have got real concerns
around how the government
are handling this and I think
Andy Burnham has done an amazing job
in standing up for the people
he represents and the same is true
for local government leaders
right across our country.
I think the disrespectful,
contemptuous way the government
has treated, notjust
Greater Manchester, but large parts
of the north of England, Ifind it
worrying and really serious.
In the north—east, we have had
additional restrictions now
for well over a month,
even longer in other
parts of the North.
Hang on, because Labour are calling
for a national lockdown,
so presumably you’re not objecting
to the restrictions,
I know you want more funding
for those restrictions,
but since we are talking about that,
how long would you like a national
lockdown to go on for?
We supported the introduction
of local restrictions,
but what has not come alongside
that is any consistency or clarity
around the funding that goes
with it, so we have had meetings
with ministers, as have council
leaders, we cannot get any answers
around what we can expect for this
formula they apparently used to
determine the funding for each area.
Just be clear, if you did get
the funding required,
how long do you think
the lockdown should continue?
Or how long do you think it should
be, because it obviously
has not started yet?
As we have set out, we think
there should be a circuit break
to reset where we are,
this is the right time to do this,
going into half term...
For how long?
For two to three weeks,
so the government have got
a chance to sort out test,
trace and isolate, it
just is not working.
We were promised a world heating
system and we have got
a barely functional system.
Until that gets sorted out,
we are going to be in a situation
where we will face rolling
lockdowns in regions right
across the country and I know,
from many of the people that I speak
to in my constituency,
workers and businesses alike,
they just want to know
that there will be an end
in sight to all of this.
They have made enormous sacrifices
to get us to this point,
but this sense, I think
it is a growing sense of anger
and alarm about how the government
is handling this and can we ever get
to the point where we start to
emerge and come out the other side?
Louis, you have got your hand up.
Yeah.
Thank you, Fiona.
You talk about a two
to three—week circuit breaker,
a circuit breaker is just a fancy
language for lockdown.
We had a three—week circuit breaker
in March, we are now seven
or eight months into it,
so what on earth are we going
to achieve in two to three weeks
that we haven’t achieved in seven
to eight months, there is no
guarantee that it will end
in two to three weeks,
we could be in exactly the same
position, just at a later date.
We aren’t dealing with the problem,
we are just pushing it further
and further down the line.
Do you want to quickly
respond to that?
The government has lost
control of the virus,
we are not in a position...
Respond to his question.
Never mind about the government.
What about the point
that Louis made?
That is why we are calling
for a national circuit breaker,
until we get into a position
where the government has got
control of the virus.
He is asking what difference do
you think it would make?
It would allow the government,
it would allow us to dampen down
the infection rates,
which are rising right
across the country, notjust
in areas that are subject to local
restrictions, it would allow
the government to get a grip
on test, trace and isolate.
In two to three weeks?
Do you think they would actually get
test, trace and isolate to be world
beating in two to three weeks?
There are immediate changes
that the government could make
to get the system working better,
to give greater powers
to local councils, to run
some of that system,
who are much better connected
to what is going on than the current
kind of privatised model
that we have got at the moment,
that involves giving a very large
sums of money to private consultants
at a point where actually
we could do that much better if that
were devolved to local communities.
Jack, you have had your hand up
for a while, let us hearfrom you.
I have, because my husband
is volunteering on Test and Trace
and I would just like to point out
that although I do feel
that the government could build
a better system to manage that,
it will not mitigate for people not
picking up the phone and it will not
mitigate against people
who are unprepared to share details
to help trace people.
Eileen, you have had
your hand up as well.
I think that the opposition
arejust basically going
against the government all the time,
regardless of what it is,
it doesn’t matter what it was,
they will always go the opposite
and they have never,
ever come up with a solution,
a viable solution, to prove
anything at all.
So, Ijust think Boris has
done marvellous myself.
And my family...
You are cheering up Nicky
enormously, Eileen!
Nikki is looking veryjolly at that.
I love that.
I do, I think he has done
a marvellousjob, I really do.
I despair if Labour were in charge,
for all of us, I think.
You have got your work
cut out there, I think,
Bridget, to persuade Eileen.
Joseph, I mean the question
is about Andy Vernon has Michael
—— Burnham standing
Greater Manchester,
I don’t know how closely
you have
been following that over
in the States, but obviously
it is in part about local
politicians taking a stand
against the national government.
Well, I think there is a lot
of truth in the circumstances
in different locations
are markedly different,
but there is a need for national
leadership and it is clear that
in the initial phases of Covid—19,
in both the UK and the US,
the national leadership was not
doing what it should —
the idea of herd immunity,
which was pushed, was
an absurd idea.
The good thing is that
you have done a lot better
than the United States subsequently.
Our national leadership still has
not come to terms with the problem,
but the notion, at the core
of the problem, is developing
social solidarity,
that was what was pointed out
before, and when you have leadership
that is not developing that kind
of trust and social solidarity,
you’re going to have a much poorer
response to the pandemic
and that is why countries
where there is a lot
of social solidarity,
leadership that exhibits that social
solidarity, countries
like New Zealand and South Korea,
have done a lot better.
Both in terms of the pandemic
and in terms of the economic
response, so it seems to me that,
as I look across the Atlantic,
I see a big failure in the national
leadership in the UK and a better
national leadership would try
to enhance that solidarity
and recognise that there is both
a need for national leadership,
but also for local and
regional leadership.
Lesley.
Hello, Ifeel there is a real
disconnect between national
leadership and the local leadership
and when there is research coming
out that says that children in large
numbers in the north—east and towns
are living in poverty,
so 33% in Sedgefield,
A1% in Middlesbrough,
for instance, you know,
we need somebody at local level
to take the issue to the leadership
and I think after yesterday’s
debate, I did not see that
leadership at a national level.
Does that concern you, Nicky?
What, this issue...
Not seeing leadership
at a national level,
hearing whatJoseph was saying.
I don’t agree with that
and of course we have also heard
from Eileen about her enthusiasm
for the leadership of Boris,
so I think, I am sitting on a House
of Lords committee at the moment,
called Life Beyond Covid and imagine
there is such a thing,
we are going to get there eventually
and we will get there,
we absolutely will,
because that is the history
of pandemics through the years,
but we obviously do not know how
and when and actually people’s
experiences of this year are very
much conditioned or peoples views
are very much conditioned
by their own experiences and Steve
was right to mention,
people are now not divided
by Brexit, they are divided
about their view on lockdown.
Some people feel very strongly that
another national lockdown
is the right thing to do,
I totally disagree with that
and other people feel it has to be
very much regional and to the point
that Lesley has just made and I am
sure that Anne will have
something to say about that,
given her role, the great sadness
is that we have spent three years
talking about Brexit and just
at the time that the country
was hopefully going to be able
to move forward and tackle
children’s outcomes, social care,
we are now obviously all of us
having to deal with this virus,
I think there is far
more social solidarity
than actually people realise.
You know, I obviously live
in the Midlands and communities
are still very much helping
each other out.
There was a headline today
in the Times saying that actually
young people are taking
the responsibility of social
distancing seriously
and that it is beginning to bring
the numbers down and that is
what we are going to see,
throughout this period obviously
of the virus, and in terms of where
we started on this question,
which was about regional leadership,
for disclosure, lam married
to a local authority leader,
I am watching him and his colleagues
obviously debating with ministers
and others about restrictions
on what is going to happen
and everything else and I think that
what is right is that regional local
authority leaders and national
leadership obviously
have to work together.
It is very difficult,
because national leadership
will often be able to see things
that pitch up across the country
in a way that inevitably regional
and local authorityjust cannot
and will not and they shouldn’t,
because they are there to stand
up for a local area,
but where we started with
the question about Andy Burnham,
my worry about the way that he has
conducted things is that somehow
to say that is right is to say
that those people like DanJarvis
and Joe Anderson and Steve Rotherham
in Merseyside, who have
not behaved like that,
have not done right
by their communities and I don’t
think that is right at all.
I think everyone has to approach
this differently and it is quite
right that we are going to see
and I think we should see
rolling, regional lockdowns
if that is what is needed,
because it would not be right,
the Prime Minister was absolutely
right, we have to keep the economy
moving, as much as we can,
in certain areas of the country,
whilst accepting that,
sadly, until we are through this,
the way we want to live our lives
is going to be curtailed.
Anne, question —
was what Andy Burnham did
this week a masterclass
in local democracy?
So, what I think is happening
is that actually local
and national leaders,
and I am a fan of the new mayors
are having to find out a new way
to work together that actually
can be constructive.
It is new, people are not used to it
and actually it is working more
or less and Andy was absolutely
right to represent the real
need of those people
in Manchester and the like,
but clearly it fell into a place
where actually all the airways
were full of the unpleasant
and seemingly unsympathetic way
that the talks came to an end,
now what I would say
about that was actually,
the more the airwaves
are filled with that,
the less time there is to look
at the real problems,
which I am hearing from the people
asking the questions here,
which is actually child poverty
is rising, especially
in the north—east, how actually
families are going to find their way
forward, what comes next and how can
people feel that level
of trust in their leaders,
both nationally and locally?
I think, again, we need to have that
real confidence in our leaders,
be they nationally or locally,
having that grown—up debate.
And if it does fall into
point—scoring at all, really, and
not saying that anyone is at this
point, then that is absolutely
missing the point.
Matthew.
I honestlyjust wish
that the north—east had
someone like Andy Burnham,
because we have been facing
these similar Tier 2 restrictions
for so long now and we have not
really had anyone to step up
to the plate and fight our corner
for us and we have watched
many of our
local businesses just go unheard,
close shop and the announcement
today from the Chancellor has just
come too late for our region and it
is really disappointing,
to be honest.
Let us take another
question from Sarah.
Is it now the case that Premiership
footballers care more about children
going hungry than most MPs?
So this, of course, is a reference
to Marcus Rashford and his campaign
to get free school meals throughout
the holidays and Labour have
supported the idea throughout
the holidays until Easter.
I mean, Anne, obviously I am going
to come to you first as children’s
Commissioner for England.
Well, certainly Marcus Rashford,
young guy, 22, really talented
individual and footballer,
has rocketed this
issue centre stage.
It is something that people have
campaigned forfor a long time,
but he brings that personal
experience and, you know,
what he is able to do is say,
look, for these kids,
life is limited in every way.
You know, I cannot forget the first
time I went into a secondary school
and saw food banks and saw washing
machines, actually there
to watch the kids clothes.
That is the reality for a growing
number of children and one which,
you know, the accusation last night
was that it was a sticking plaster,
it may not be the full answer,
but actually we need a long—term
plan and until we have it,
the bottom line surely has to be
that children get the help they need
to not go hungry.
I remain absolutely astonished
that we are still having
this debate, it is 2020,
you know, a wealthy country,
it has the air of Dickensian
about it and I actually think that
people do want to do their best
for kids and we have done that,
the government has been bold
and generous in providing free
school meals over recent months
and to continue that,
while we are in the midst
of a crisis and pandemic,
to me sounds basic.
What do you make of comments,
for example, from one Tory
MP during the debate,
where is the slick PR campaigning
encouraging absent parents
to take some responsibility
for their children?
I don’t believe in
nationalising children.
There is always the debate that
if you have children,
you should look after them,
kind of a bit like pets, but again,
I thought we had moved beyond that.
Of course families want to look
after their kids, of course
they want to provide for them,
but we know that reality is that
kids often do not have
food in the cupboards.
I had a group of Newsround kids
come round to see me,
really bright individuals,
but they told me they will
go home and not know
what was in the cupboards
and for a lot of us,
that is difficult to imagine
what that means, but it takes away
all your confidence,
all your self—belief
and all your ability,
actually, that the future is going
to have any promise for you.
Ithink, you know,
we are in the middle
of the pandemic, still,
we are at crisis point,
there is a growing number
of children who are in poverty,
that is not going away,
it needs a serious plan,
and I want government
and I would say this,
whatever government was there,
actually to see it as their mission
that they reduce poverty and food
poverty, it is something
that governments can do,
we had seen pensioner
poverty reduced
drastically over recent
years, but really the focus has
to be, because if we are going
to level up and if anyone
in the north—east, everyone wants
the north—east to succeed,
but actually people have to be able
to know that they are going to be
able to be financially viable to do
that and kids need to know
that they are going to be able
to succeed and thrive.
Martin, you are a teacher of course,
what is your perspective?
One of the basic rights of a child,
according to the UN,
is the right to nutritious food,
and I think the comments
in Parliament, for example,
it is really important to remember
that poverty is not a choice,
it is not a lifestyle choice,
and children have the right
to nutritious food and I think,
really, the government need
to understand that and actually,
if they can fund eat out
to help out, then surely
they can fund something
that would prevent children
from going hungry.
David.
Ijust find it hypocritical
that they voted against extending
the free school meals and yet
they voted themselves
a £3000 plus pay rise.
Well, they didn’t vote
for themselves, it is an independent
committee, I have got that right,
haven’t I, Nicky?
That’s right.
That does that.
But, I hear your point.
Stephen.
What did you make of the debate
and the campaign of Marcus Rashford?
First of all, I think
Marcus Rashford, what an inspiring
young man and I have to say,
it is really impressive,
we were used to other kinds
of headlines about footballers,
but to see this young man be such
a role model and really inspiring
in his courage and bravery to stand
up for something he really
believes in and I think...
Do you think the government
was right to oppose the motion?
We had a brief discussion,
it came up in the previous
question, about trust
and it was about the social cohesion
and trust in the government
and we have seen countries around
the world that have done
well with coronavirus,
the Covid—19 response,
that have both trusted in the people
and have the trust of the people
and if you look at Jacinda Ardern’s
election win in New Zealand,
it has been described as an example
of compassionate competence,
in different kind
of democratic area.
I still don’t know whether you
think the government
should have done this?
It is an absolute own goal.
So, they should have.
Ijust don’t understand how it is,
even if they don’t believe
the detail of this thing,
that they can vote against money
for children, and I think one
of the things we are seen
with Covid—19 is that it is
exacerbating and making worse social
divides that we already have
in this country.
We have a huge problem
with inequality, OVO Energy,
has a foundation, one
of our investment themes
early years education,
and there is such a dramatic
problem with the fact that
in the 21st century,
children that grow up in Britain,
their economic success
in life is already mostly
predictable by the age of five
and we just need dramatically more
investment in children,
in education and free school meals
for children on school holidays
is just so obviously
an opportunity for the government
to show some compassion.
Bridget.
I mean, it is just inexplicable that
in the middle of this terrible
pandemic, as we come into a really
difficult winterfor lots
of families, that the government
will not support this.
I think Marcus Rashford has
done an incrediblejob,
as someone who himself was once poor
and hungry, speaking up
for vulnerable children who do not
have a voice and to make sure that
no child goes hungry this Christmas.
We are such a wealthy country
with a great opportunity
and it is a scar on our country that
so many children grow up
in poverty, avoidable poverty.
The government could step in,
notjust in this area,
but I think this is one aspect
of what we have seen is a growing
trend in recent years,
where more and more children,
including those in families
where there is work,
are finding that the money just
is not there and it does not
stretch, and that is putting
families in an impossible situation.
When I grew up, as someone who spent
part of my childhood on free school
meals in a single—parent family,
I was lucky, lots of the other kids
that I grew up with, were not
so lucky and were not so fortunate.
I thought this country,
we could put those days behind us,
but we are going backwards and it
breaks my heart to see kids
in my communityjust going hungry
in the midst of this
terrible, terrible crisis.
Joseph.
Well, I find this debate
actually amazing.
I do find what the government
did unconscionable.
In New York City, when we close
the schools in the lockdown,
one thing we kept was the school
lunch programmes, people could go
to the schools and get
the lunches that they would
have otherwise gotten.
A lot of careful social
distancing and all that,
but the fact that a child who does
not get food can be scarred for life
and obviously cannot learn
in the way that they should.
So, as everyone has been saying,
as a basic human right,
they are a child, the child
is a person, you are talking
about the future of the UK
and the fact that you’re not
in the era of Charles Dickens now,
you are in the 21st century,
that you would be having this debate
about whether children should have
adequate nutrition, Ifind
that quite unbelievable.
I mean Nicky, you supported
legislation that will give
the poorest children free school
meals over the holidays back
in 2017, is this a good
look for the government?
Well, I think the Labour Party might
have found it would have got more
supporters yesterday if the deputy
Labour leader had not called one
of the Conservative MPs scum
in the course of the debate.
I have to say yesterday’s debate...
I don’t think anyone is defending
that, but that is not
exactly the point, is it?
The point is, if you want to build
a Coalition, we have heard comments
saying it is unconscionable
that the government did not
support this, well,
1.
II
If the Labour Party had wanted an
If the labour Party had wanted an
Marcus
If the Labour Party had wanted an
Marcus Rashford complaint about
becoming politicised and if the
Labour Party have wanted support
labour Party have wanted support
they would
Labour Party have wanted support
they would not have had an
opposition debate, they would have
been other ways to build a Coalition
in Parliament and I should just
challenge the fact that as Education
Secretary. . .
Secretary... Was it a political
reason that the government did not
support it or did the government not
supported because it did not believe
in it? The government has put in
money dramatically to expand free
school meals anyway. Did they not
like the way Labour put the motion
like the way labour put the motion
or
like the way Labour put the motion
or because the government does not
believe in it on principle? The
government has spent over £300
million making sure that school meal
vouchers can be redeemed and to
vouchers ran be redeemed and to
answer
vouchers can be redeemed and to
answer the point made by
answer the point made byJoseph,
answer the point made byjoseph,
when
answer the point made byJoseph,
when schools were not open in the
spring and summer of this year, that
is exactly when the government did
put those hundreds of millions of
pounds in to make sure that meals
were available to those children who
would otherwise be on free school
meals. I personally think there are
other ways, and made a good point
about needing an overall strategy
but making sure we work with their
authorities, for example, the clue
is free school meals, we give
support to children at school,
pre—breakfast
pre—brea kfast clubs
support to children at school,
pre—breakfast clubs and after—school
pre-breakfast clubs and after-school
dubs
clubs and
pre—breakfast clubs and after—school
clubs and everything else, but at
other times, when the schools have
been open, there are other ways in
which to get money and the
government is putting money into
[oral
local authorities and I am sure we
[oral authorities and I am sure we
could do
local authorities and I am sure we
could do more to put money via local
could do more to put money via [oral
authorities
could do more to put money via local
authorities to support families in
need, but yesterday’s handling of
need, but yesterdays handling of
the
need, but yesterday’s handling of
the debate, watching that toxic
debate in Parliament, watching the
debate in Partiament, watching the
“Y
way that it
debate in Parliament, watching the
way that it was handled, Bridget
knows, if you want an issue really
tackled, do not put it down as an
Opposition Day motion if you want to
build a Coalition in Parliament.
People are going hungry over
Christmas because you do not like
the Parliamentary process. If you
the Partiamentary process. If you
really want to
the Parliamentary process. If you
really want to get people supporting
really want to get peopla supporting
this
really want to get people supporting
this debate, labelling Conservative
MPs unconscionable and using
unparliamentary language and the way
unpartiamentary language and the way
it was
unparliamentary language and the way
it was dealt with, absolutely not.
The government is putting their
money in and it would be better to
work together to make sure that
[oral
local authorities and schools are
[oral authorities and schools are
able to get
local authorities and schools are
able to get that money and help to
support those children who are
obviously otherwise not getting the
sport at home. Very briefly, what do
sport at home. Very brieﬂy, what do
you make of
sport at home. Very briefly, what do
you make of that? I think the whole
issue of feeding children which is
aptly fundamental has got caught up
in the political headlight here. It
is something that failed yesterday,
I think, because it ended up as a
secondary issue here. It is too
important for that and I do think
peopla have
people have to work together to put
peopla have to work together to put
this
people have to work together to put
this aside. There has been a lot put
in over recent months which means it
is even stranger to not put that
extra 40
extra A0 million and over the next
extra 40 million and over the next
few
extra A0 million and over the next
few weeks. That is what Wales and
Scotland are doing. At the end of
the day, all those long—term plans
the day, all those long-term plans
need to
the day, all those long—term plans
need to be there and all of the
different ways of supporting
children is really important, but
free school meals, be they in school
or not, it gets straight to skills
—— Michael Kidd and you know they
-- Michael Kidd and you know they
have got a mail
—— Michael Kidd and you know they
have got a mail and that is what
kids and parents want. I want to
take a quick question from David
Owen is what kids and parents want.
I want to take a quick question from
David Owens now. David. Thank you.
Given how long this
has going on and there
is no clear way out,
are we all going
to follow the rules?
Are you? Well, bearing in mind that
certain police officers don’t seem
to know the rules, it is very
to know the mles, it is very
difficult,
to know the rules, it is very
difficult, because they seem to
change every couple of minutes. You
ran go into a pub
can go into a pub for a meal, but
ran go into a pub for a meal, but
you cannot go in
can go into a pub for a meal, but
you cannot go injust
you cannot go in just for a
can go into a pub for a meal, but
you cannot go injust for a beer! We
you cannot go in just for a beer! We
need to
you cannot go injust for a beer! We
need to see the science, we need to
see the evidence of all these rules.
see the evidence of all these mles.
Rita, I
Rita, Ispoke
see the evidence of all these mles.
Rita, I spoke to
see the evidence of all these rules.
Rita, I spoke to you earlier before
Rita, I spoke to you eartier before
we fame
Rita, I spoke to you earlier before
we came on the programme and you had
something rather interesting to say
about following the rules. Yes, I
about following the mles. Yes, I
was just
about following the rules. Yes, I
was just saying that people need
was just saying that peopla need
peopla and
was just saying that people need
people and my friend went through a
terrible experience last year that
nobody should ever have to go
through, no parent, and she lives
alone and although I am not in her
bubble, I would
bubble, Iwould not
alone and although I am not in her
bubble, I would not hesitate,
bubble, Iwould not hesitate, if
alone and although I am not in her
bubble, I would not hesitate, if she
bubble, Iwould not hesitate, if she
needed me,
bubble, I would not hesitate, if she
needed me, ever, to go and see her,
he
be with her, because people need
people. A lot of people are not
peopla. A lot of peopla are not
going to
people. A lot of people are not
going to stick to the rules, not
going to stick to the mles, not
just because
going to stick to the rules, not
just because there are so many
people in this position.
It’s very situational. I am in
lockdown at the moment. I’ve got
five days to go before I come out of
isolation. I have got family in
Scotland under one set of rules,
Scotland under one set of mles,
family in
Scotland under one set of rules,
family in West Yorkshire, in
Sedgefield and Durham it’s a
different rule, and I’ve got a
different mle, and I’ve got a
daughter in
different rule, and I’ve got a
daughter in Wales and we are all
daughter in Walas and we are all
living in
daughter in Wales and we are all
living in different variations and
going into different types of
lockdown, and it’s hard to keep to
the mles.
the rules. Personally, I do keep to
the mles. Personally, I do keep to
the mles
the rules. Personally, I do keep to
the rules because of my background
the mles because of my background
working in the
the rules because of my background
working in the NHS and social
responsibility, but I can also
self—isolated. I’m in that lucky
self-isolated. I’m in that lucky
position.
I’m interested, considering we are
in a national lockdown, but it eased
off over the summer and we are now
heading back into who knows how long
of restrictions, whether attitudes
have changed. Eileen. I am 7A and
have changed. Eilaen. I am 74 and
live
have changed. Eileen. I am 74 and
live alone
have changed. Eileen. I am 7A and
live alone and I need family, I need
people for mental health reasons,
really, so
really, sol
people for mental health reasons,
really, so I don’t think I will be
totally sticking to it, whereas I am
very careful, and they are very
careful with me, but what choices do
I have? Did you stick to it
religiously the first time, back in
March?
March? Yes. First time round, but it
was very difficult, very difficult.
Now my grandson comes and does the
garden. I have a big garden and he
comes and does it for me, and I have
a couple of friends who have come
round, and obviously my daughters
and sons. I couldn’t live here on my
own. I need help with a big house.
Louis. I think we’ve seen a couple
of recent examples in the country
first up we had a funeral where a
son was prevented from comforting
his grieving mother because it went
against the rules, and I saw an
against the mles, and I saw an
interview
against the rules, and I saw an
interview on the BBC yesterday when
84-year-old
84—year—old said she had very few
84-year-old said she had very few
years left and
84—year—old said she had very few
years left and she wasn’t going to
spend them confide in a house. I
have an 83 rod grandmother who lives
alone, a widow. If I didn’t go and
see her, I think the effect on her
mental health would probably equal
the threat that Covid would
eventually equate to, so at what
point to the restrictions get in the
“Y
way of being a basic, decent human
being? I
being? lam
way of being a basic, decent human
being? I am a teacher at Sedgefield
community college and, over the past
couple of weeks, we have been told
we need to reduce our social
contact, but I feel as a teacher,
and also other
and also otherjobs, it’s very
and also other jobs, it’s very
difficult
and also otherjobs, it’s very
difficult to reduce our social
contact, when we come into contact
with hundreds of students every
single day. And Sarah, one point
singla day. And Sarah, one point
from you. My
single day. And Sarah, one point
from you. My son is one of his
students and is currently isolating
at home. I am a
at home. I am areal
students and is currently isolating
at home. I am a real stickler
at home. I am a real sticklerfor
at home. I am a real sticklar for
the mles
at home. I am a real sticklerfor
the rules but I totally understand
the mles but I totally understand
the
the rules but I totally understand
the compassionate need to see
people, I totally support that, but
peopla, I totally support that, but
it’s incredibly
people, I totally support that, but
it’s incredibly hard as a parent to
be encouraging your children to
follow the rules when they see
follow the mles when they see
peopla
follow the rules when they see
people breaking them left, right and
centre. I don’t want to spend too
long on this, but Bridget or Nicky,
brieﬂy, how
briefly, how much a concern is this?
brieﬂy, how much a concern is this?
I suspect our
briefly, how much a concern is this?
I suspect our audience are not
alone, they are not naturally rule
alone, they are not naturally mle
breakers,
alone, they are not naturally rule
breakers, and I’m making an
assumption about ones we have heard
from, but they are acting
differently this time round,
especially with Labour, who was a
especially with labour, who was a
national
especially with Labour, who was a
national lockdown to stop if people
national lockdown to stop if peopla
are not going
national lockdown to stop if people
are not going to obey the rules,
are not going to obey the mles,
what’s
are not going to obey the rules,
what’s the point? We are not arguing
for a national lockdown. Cue you
want a circuit breaker. We are not
calling for an ongoing national
lockdown. However
lockdown. Howeveryou
calling for an ongoing national
lockdown. However you want to define
it, how concerned are you that
peopla will
people will not obey the rules out
peopla will not obey the mles out
of sheer
people will not obey the rules out
of sheer fatigue?
of sheerfatigue? It’s
people will not obey the rules out
of sheer fatigue? It’s tough, and
of sheerfatigue? It’s tough, and I
of sheer fatigue? It’s tough, and I
hear that.
of sheerfatigue? It’s tough, and I
hearthat. In
hear that. In large part of the
north—east we have had restrictions
north-east we have had restrictions
in place for
north—east we have had restrictions
in place for some time and I know
that peopla are
that people are fatigued by it and
that peopla are fatigued by it and
want to
that people are fatigued by it and
want to see a way through the top of
course we have to follow the rules.
course we have to follow the mles.
What it
course we have to follow the rules.
What it tells me is what we are
what it tells me is what we are
embarking or
What it tells me is what we are
embarking or is something that is
much psychological as anything else,
and that means that rules have to be
and that means that mles have to be
designed
and that means that rules have to be
designed understanding how tough
they are going to be for people, and
they are going to be for peopla, and
understanding
they are going to be for people, and
understanding what we are asking of
them. Obviously, I
them. Obviously, Iwould
understanding what we are asking of
them. Obviously, I would encourage
them. Obviously, Iwould encourage
people to stick
them. Obviously, I would encourage
people to stick to the rules, but
peopla to stick to the mles, but
peopla have
people to stick to the rules, but
people have talked about the mental
health burden, and that is obviously
massive, but I think, in the grand
scheme of things, there will be a
“Y
way out, we will get through,
history tells us that, but
unfortunately it’s going to be a
very difficult few months. And a
final question which, when I started
on Question Time, dominated
everything for months on end and I
thought we would never talk about
anything else! Let’s bring it back
with Carol.
With global economies being
decimated by the COVID 19 pandemic,
is now really the best time to be
walking into a no deal
situation with the EU,
regardless of dressing it up
as a meaningless "Australia deal"?
Joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel
joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel
prize-winning
Joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel
prize—winning economist. ——
prize—winning economist. ——Joseph.
prize-winning economist. -- joseph.
I think it
prize—winning economist. ——Joseph.
I think it was a bad thing to look
into, a no—deal Brexit, any time,
into, a no-deal Brexit, any time,
but this is
into, a no—deal Brexit, any time,
but this is an especially bad time.
The global economy is going to be
weak.
week. There is a slowdown
everywhere, but in Europe, and that
will of itself impose constraints on
trade. And then there is a slowdown
in the UK, and on top of all that,
to put new trade barriers seems
particularty
particularly foolish. On top of
particularty foolish. On top of
that, to do
particularly foolish. On top of
that, to do it in a context where
there is no deal, where there is
uncertainty about the political, how
is the Ireland issue going to be
dealt with? Where are the
boundaries? What would be the
consequences? Enormous amount of
uncertainty, and what we have heard
in the discussion in the last hour
is how the pandemic has brought
uncertainty, how the government’s
failure to
hhmhyn
uncertainty, how the government’s
failure to give the kinds of
assistance at the right time, in a
timely way has enhanced the
uncertainty that individuals face,
so we have the pandemic, we have the
inadequate economic response to the
pandemic, and now we have the
uncertainty of a no—deal Brexit. It
uncertainty of a no-deal Brexit. It
seems to me,
uncertainty of a no—deal Brexit. It
seems to me, if you were going to
maximise uncertainty, you couldn’t
have done a better
have done a betterjob. I run a
have done a better job. I nm a
business
have done a betterjob. I run a
business with about 7500, 8000
employees in the UK, and we also
operate in France and Spain. I run
operate in France and Spain. I mn
an aircraft
operate in France and Spain. I run
an aircraft business, building
electric flying taxes, with a big
electric ﬂying taxes, with a big
European
electric flying taxes, with a big
European supply chain, and Brexit is
not in the top ten list of things
that I spent my time thinking about
or worrying about. Is that because
you wouldn’t be particularly
affected? There are much bigger
issues. I have to say, I think,
issues. I have to say, Ithink, if
you look at where we are right now
in the negotiations, we have a
couple of months left to go, I think
it’s absolutely right that the
government is saying, we need to
have a strong full back position. As
somebody who has been a lot of
negotiation, in a negotiation you
have to say, we are going to shake
hands and walk away if we don’t get
an agreement. You have to be in a
position where people are ready for
position where peopla are ready for
that, and I
position where people are ready for
that, and I am optimistic, and I
that, and lam optimistic, and I
hope we will
that, and I am optimistic, and I
hope we will find the right
agreement but, if you look at the
history of EU trade negotiations,
it’s very difficult. Can a debt
it’s very difficult. (“an a debt
negotiator
it’s very difficult. Can a debt
negotiator for seven years to get
their free trade agreement and it
was held up by one state in Belgium
for a year. So God help us, is that
what you are saying? We have to have
a robust negotiating position but we
also have to think about what kind
of economy we are going to build,
what does independence from the you
you must freedom to do, more
renewable energy, carbon price and
taxation, we will have COP26 in the
taxation, we will have (20st in the
UK, and we
taxation, we will have COP26 in the
UK, and we have an opportunity to
[ad the
lead the world in the next zero
transition. That is the opportunity
we should be talking about. I think
it’s hard to believe that this is
almost a PS question whereas, at one
point, it dominated completely. Tell
point, it dominated complately. Tell
me about
point, it dominated completely. Tell
me about it! What it did do was it
me about it! what it did do was it
drove out any
me about it! What it did do was it
drove out any discussion about
domestic issues for that time, so
that was my real worry, it wiped
that off the agenda. Clearly it adds
that off the agenda. Cleariy it adds
to
that off the agenda. Clearly it adds
to uncertainty. It wouldn’t be
ideal. But, you know, like it or
not, it is going to happen, and now
I think peopla
I think people need to see what this
I think peopla need to see what this
does
I think people need to see what this
does mean for the future, in terms
of
ofjobs, in terms of progress, and
how this will help our area actually
not only get back on their feet but
get ahead. There is a lot at stake,
obviously. This absolutely has to
work for the kind of questions we
have seen this evening. I sincerely
hope that we get a deal for the
businesses in the north—east are
businesses in the north-east are
facing a tough
businesses in the north—east are
facing a tough enough time without
this added uncertainty for the great
manufacturing export businesses that
depend on that trade. I sincerely
hope the government do absolutely
everything to get the deal, stop the
posturing, stop messing about and
get it done. Dropped the posturing,
Nicky. The news today is the fact
that discussions are continuing, and
I think they will and I am hopeful
there will be a deal, so
there will be a deal, sol
I think they will and I am hopeful
there will be a deal, so I don’t
think we are heading to the outlined
by our question of the top what we
can’t do is tarry
can’t do is carry on extending the
transition period, getting
businesses to prepare and do not
prepare, and Stephen said that of
the top ten things to worry about
this is not on it, I don’t know if
it was, but it’s not now. Hindsight
is a marvellous thing but, if you
had been able to look into a crystal
ball and no that we were going to be
leaving the EU in the middle of a
pandemic, with a recession forecast
the likes of which we have never
seen, or not for hundreds of years,
would you really want
would you really wa nt to
seen, or not for hundreds of years,
would you really want to be doing it
now? As you say, who knows? We don’t
know what’s going to happen for the
what you would try to have done
would be to have left completely in
the Slst of January this year, so
the 31st of january this year, so
that
the 31st of January this year, so
that were clear by the time the
government had to be dealing with
the pandemic, and the lesson we
learnt from the three years before
that is you keep kicking the can
that is you keep kicking the ran
down
that is you keep kicking the can
down the road it doesn’t get easier.
People voted the way they did in
2016, including many people in the
2016, including many peopla in the
parts of the
2016, including many people in the
parts of the country where we have
audience on tonight. They waited a
long time in order
long time in orderfor this to
long time in order for this to
happen. I
long time in orderfor this to
happen. I think it’s right that we
get on with it. It is possible. We
have ministers engaged in that,
civil servants engaged in that, and
other parts of government focused on
the vims.
the virus. It is possible to do both
the vims. It is possibla to do both
at the
the virus. It is possible to do both
at the same time. How confident are
you will get a deal? I think both
sides want deal, and I think right
across Europe they realise that
having a deal would make everybody’s
having a deal would make everybodrs
life much,
having a deal would make everybody’s
life much, much easier. I guess you
ran never say,
can never say, because the other
ran never say, because the other
thing I learnt
can never say, because the other
thing I learnt about Boris
thing I learnt about BorisJohnson
thing I learnt about Boris johnson
it is
thing I learnt about BorisJohnson
it is absolute prepared to walk away
in a way which our previous Prime
Minister was not, but I think we all
know that, of course, life would be
easier on the 1st of
easier on the 1st ofJanuary
know that, of course, life would be
easier on the 1st of January with a
easier on the 1st of january with a
deal in place.
easier on the 1st of January with a
deal in place. Discussions started
again today and we will see where
they end up. Our time is up.
Tonight, our questioners came from
Sedgefield. Thank you for
Sedgefield. Thank you forjoining
Sedgefield. Thank you for joining
us. You
Sedgefield. Thank you forjoining
us. You were tremendous. Next week,
we are joined by
we arejoined by an
us. You were tremendous. Next week,
we are joined by an audience in
Lincoln and by Rupert Soames, the
boss of Serco, one of the companies
involved in Test and Trace. We will
also be joined
also bejoined by the
involved in Test and Trace. We will
also be joined by the former,
however briefly, director of
communications for Donald Trump,
communications for Donald Tmmp,
Anthony
communications for Donald Trump,
Anthony Scaramucci Philip why would
Anthony Saramucci Philip why would
you want to
Anthony Scaramucci Philip why would
you want to miss that? After
you want to miss that? After that,
the audience comes from Lewisham,
south—east London. Get in touch and
south-east London. Get in touch and
take the
south—east London. Get in touch and
take the opportunity to put your
questions. We would love to hear
from you for Question Time is what
it is because of the audience. You
ran apply by
can apply by going to the website.
ran apply by going to the website.
You ran
can apply by going to the website.
You can fill in the form and we will
You ran fill in the form and we will
hear what
You can fill in the form and we will
hear what you’ve got to safe and
hopefully you will be part of our
virtual audience next week. For now,
Adrian Chiles and guests are on
Question Time Extra Time, your
chance to put your points to that on
Radio 5 Live. You can see how to get
Radio 5 Live. You ran see how to get
in touch on
Radio 5 Live. You can see how to get
in touch on the screen. For now,
thank you very much to my panel for
coming here this evening, socially
distance, as we always are now
offered up to our audience, thank
you to you, and to Professor
you to you, and to ProfessorJoseph
you to you, and to Professorjoseph
Stiglitz from
you to you, and to ProfessorJoseph
Stiglitz from New York, and to you
at home for watching. From Question
Time, goodbye.
I don’t want to even want to speak.
This music’s way too smooth.
But how can sound waves physically
make you move?
And in return, you get experiences
you like. It lifts you high.
ASTRONAUT: "Should be coming into
view.
Earth’s starting to look
pretty small now.
I guess the world really does
turn...
MUSIC PLAYS
Be moved by...
# Now I beg to see you dance
just one more time
# So dance for me, dance for me,
dance for me, oh, oh
# And when you’re done,
I’ll make you do it all again... #
It’s what we’ve all been
waiting for.
Strictly, the brand—new series...
Chris, shall we kick
off our new policy of introducing
our special guests by dressing up
and having appropriate props.
I think we should, shouldn’t we?
And you and I have always gone
for subtlety, in this
particular department,
hence my current attire
which will be very obvious
if you are watching on the telly
and less obvious if you are
listening on the podcast.
Let mejust describe,
I have a high vizjacket on.
A fluorescent yellow
jacket about my person.
That is the first clue,
second clue, you’re going
to get it after this one.
I have brought a battered
old red box, the sort
of which you would see on budget
day, with the budget inside it.
And, are you getting warmer?
And you are in possession of a final
clue as well, aren’t you?
A fine newspaper,
the Evening Standard.
And therefore, it is pretty obvious,
I think, to keen Newscasters now,
that our first guest this week
is George Osborne,
the former Chancellor.
Hello, George.
Hello.
Even I can get those close!
When was the last time
you were in a fluorescentjacket?
They rather went out of fashion
on the right of politics
after the giletsjaunes in Paris
started to use them.
That was a few years ago.
Boris has started wearing them,
which is a sure sign
that we are in economic trouble.
You had your own custom made
hard hat, didn’t you?
I had a few on various
building sites.
You know, when the economy
is in trouble, the best thing to do
is put the hi—vis on,
but the hat on and you know,
you persuade people that
things are being built.
The more hi—vis jackets you see
on more politicians over the next
year, that is a good index for how
much economic trouble we are in.
I varied it a bit and started
wearing various restaurant outfits
as I went round cooking,
you know, tandooris in Wolverhampton
and pizzas in Brighton
and all sorts of...
Oh, so even the restaurant photo op,
that has been done before?
We did get into making things
on camera, that enables
the likes of you to put
a clever voice—over on.
You made a steak
for me once, actually.
In Sherwood Forest.
Oh, yes.
With the person who is now
the government Chief Whip!
Exactly!
At least one of us is doing
well out of that dinner!
George, thank you very much
forjoining us on newscast, we have
got lots to talk about tonight.
Great to be on.
Newscast.
Newscast, from the BBC.
Hello, it is Adam in the studio.
And Laura, in the same
studio, two metres apart,
slightly breathless.
And Chris, 20 yards down
the corridor in my socially
distanced [air of news as usual.
And George Osborne is here.
Not wearing hi—vis or a customised
hard hat, but looking fine
as it is, definitely.
Right, there is loads of stuff
to talk about the economy today,
because Rishi Sunak announced
what I am going to call
the pre—midwinter economic
programme, having announced
the economic winter programme before
and now changing it to basically
make it more generous,
to help businesses who are in areas
where there is lots of coronavirus
restrictions and also
to make his newJob Support Scheme
3 bit more generous.
Yeah.
In other words, he has come back
again, because the first
one did not do enough.
Shall we have a listen
to how he described it?
We have an economic plan that
will protect the jobs
and livelihoods of the British
people, wherever they live
and whatever their situation.
And just as we have throughout this
crisis, we will listen and respond
to people’s concerns
as the situation demands.
And I make no apology for responding
to changing circumstances.